# Tidy data-set Code Book

## Introduction
This repository contains my work for the Coursera Getting and Cleaning Data project. It takes as input inertial sensor data from smartphones for multple subjects performing normal activities, and processes it to create a "tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject."

## Study design
We were given the data set to work on in our course; we did not design any experiments or collect any data ourselves.

The data came from the UCI Machine Learning Repository - the __Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set__ The abstract:
> Human Activity Recognition database built from the recordings of 30 subjects performing activities of daily living (ADL) while carrying a waist-mounted smartphone with embedded inertial sensors.

For more details, see http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

## Raw data processing
The  ```output_data.txt``` output file was generated by the "October 2015 - v1.00" version of my ```run_analysis.R``` script. No other automated or manual changes were made to the input files or to the output file. See the __Running the script__ section in the README.md for more details.

**Input data:** The script was run against the data provided in the compressed file provided for the course, from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip  and was downloaded in mid October, 2015. More details are available from http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

**Processing data:** I have included many comments in the script itself, but at a high level, the script does the following:

1. Load the metadata we need for processing (activity labels, feature names, etc...)
2. Load and process the *test data set* with a function I created called ````readAndMerge()```` - This includes loading the three files from disk, and cleaning them up  to only include the columns we want to work with, etc...
3. Repeat the above for the *training data set* (with the same function, ````readAndMerge()````)
4. Merge the test and training data sets into one using rbind()
5. Use the ````dplyr```` library to process the merged data set from the above step. The command is pretty self explanatory:
  1. group the data by the subject # and activity
  2. take the average of each (numberic) column - this is the whole point of the excercise
  3. arrange the data by subject # and activity
6. We now have a set of rows which average the value for each unique combination of subject together with activity together with feature. Write that to the ```output_data.txt``` file described in more detail in the next section.

## Data in the output file
The first two columns describe the unique combination of:
- (col 1) - subject - an integer ranging from 1 to 30 for each of the subjects in the experiment
- (col 2) - Activity_Label	- an english string describing the activity, like WALKING_UPSTAIRS or STANDING

The third column is a numeric representation of the Activity_Label:
- (col 3) - Activity_ID - an integer ranging from 1 to 6 - ie 1 represents Activity_Label = WALKING

The final set of columns are the average values observed for this subject doing this activity. More details on how these raw values were collected and processed is available in the ```features_info.txt``` file included in the original source data file.

Column #|Header string|Units|Description
:------:|-------------|:---:|-----------
4|tBodyAcc-mean()-X|time|The average value for the mean body acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
5|tBodyAcc-mean()-Y|time|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
6|tBodyAcc-mean()-Z|time|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
7|tBodyAcc-std()-X|time|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
8|tBodyAcc-std()-Y|time|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
9|tBodyAcc-std()-Z|time|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
10|tGravityAcc-mean()-X|time|The average value for the mean gravity acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
11|tGravityAcc-mean()-Y|time|The average value for the mean gravity acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
12|tGravityAcc-mean()-Z|time|The average value for the mean gravity acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
13|tGravityAcc-std()-X|time|The average value for the standard deviation gravity acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
14|tGravityAcc-std()-Y|time|The average value for the standard deviation gravity acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
15|tGravityAcc-std()-Z|time|The average value for the standard deviation gravity acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
16|tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X|time|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
17|tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y|time|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
18|tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z|time|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
19|tBodyAccJerk-std()-X|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
20|tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
21|tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
22|tBodyGyro-mean()-X|time|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
23|tBodyGyro-mean()-Y|time|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
24|tBodyGyro-mean()-Z|time|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
25|tBodyGyro-std()-X|time|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
26|tBodyGyro-std()-Y|time|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
27|tBodyGyro-std()-Z|time|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
28|tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X|time|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
29|tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y|time|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
30|tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z|time|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
31|tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
32|tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
33|tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
34|tBodyAccMag-mean()|time|The average value for the mean body acceleration measurement.
35|tBodyAccMag-std()|time|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration measurement.
36|tGravityAccMag-mean()|time|The average value for the mean gravity acceleration measurement.
37|tGravityAccMag-std()|time|The average value for the standard deviation gravity acceleration measurement.
38|tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()|time|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration measurement.
39|tBodyAccJerkMag-std()|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration measurement.
40|tBodyGyroMag-mean()|time|The average value for the mean body gyroscope measurement.
41|tBodyGyroMag-std()|time|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope measurement.
42|tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()|time|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope measurement.
43|tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()|time|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk gyroscope measurement.
44|fBodyAcc-mean()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
45|fBodyAcc-mean()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
46|fBodyAcc-mean()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
47|fBodyAcc-std()-X|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
48|fBodyAcc-std()-Y|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
49|fBodyAcc-std()-Z|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
50|fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
51|fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
52|fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
53|fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
54|fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
55|fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
56|fBodyAccJerk-std()-X|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
57|fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
58|fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
59|fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (X-axis) measurement.
60|fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Y-axis) measurement.
61|fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration (Z-axis) measurement.
62|fBodyGyro-mean()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
63|fBodyGyro-mean()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
64|fBodyGyro-mean()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
65|fBodyGyro-std()-X|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
66|fBodyGyro-std()-Y|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
67|fBodyGyro-std()-Z|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
68|fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-X|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (X-axis) measurement.
69|fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-Y|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Y-axis) measurement.
70|fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-Z|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope (Z-axis) measurement.
71|fBodyAccMag-mean()|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration measurement.
72|fBodyAccMag-std()|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body acceleration measurement.
73|fBodyAccMag-meanFreq()|frequency|The average value for the mean body acceleration measurement.
74|fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration measurement.
75|fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk acceleration measurement.
76|fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-meanFreq()|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk acceleration measurement.
77|fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope measurement.
78|fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body gyroscope measurement.
79|fBodyBodyGyroMag-meanFreq()|frequency|The average value for the mean body gyroscope measurement.
80|fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope measurement.
81|fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()|frequency|The average value for the standard deviation body jerk gyroscope measurement.
82|FbodyBodyGyroJerkMag-meanFreq()|frequency|The average value for the mean body jerk gyroscope measurement.
